README.md, before:

# AI Healthcare Data Agent (POC)

An intelligent healthcare data analysis system that combines natural language processing with interactive data visualizations. Ask questions in plain English and get instant insights with beautiful Plotly.js charts.

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9+-blue.svg)
![Node](https://img.shields.io/badge/node-23+-green.svg)
![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ready-blue.svg)

## 🚀 Quick Start (Docker - Recommended)

**The fastest way to get started:**

```powershell
# Windows
.\docker-start.ps1

# Linux/Mac
chmod +x docker-start.sh
./docker-start.sh
```

This will:
- ✅ Start Ollama (local LLM - qwen3:latest)
- ✅ Start FastAPI backend
- ✅ Start React frontend with Nginx
- ✅ Pull the AI model (~2GB)
- ✅ Open at http://localhost:3000

**Requirements:** Docker Desktop ([Download](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop))

**See full Docker guide:** [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Visual Insights](#-visual-insights)
- [Tech Stack](#tech-stack)
- [Quick Start (Docker)](#-quick-start-docker---recommended)
- [Manual Installation](#manual-installation)
  - [Ubuntu/Linux](#ubuntulinux)
  - [Windows](#windows)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Docker Deployment](#docker-deployment)
- [Local Model Setup](#local-model-setup-ollama)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Supported Visualizations](#supported-visualizations)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Development](#development)
- [Security](#security)

---

## Features

- 🤖 **Natural Language Queries**: Ask questions in plain English about healthcare data
- 📊 **60+ Interactive Visualizations**: Powered by Plotly.js with real-time chart type switching
- 🔐 **Authentication & Security**: Sci-Fi themed Login/Register, JWT protection, and GitHub Secrets integration
- 💬 **Persistent Chat History**: Context-aware conversations suitable for follow-up questions
- 🎨 **Futuristic HUD Interface**: Cyberpunk-inspired dark theme with glassmorphism effects
- 🔄 **Smart Visualization Selection**: AI-powered chart type recommendation based on data structure
- 🎯 **Hybrid LLM Support**: Local models (Ollama) or Cloud (Google Gemini)
- 🐳 **Docker Ready**: One-command deployment with Docker Compose

## ✨ Visual Insights

| Choropleth Map | Pie Chart | Bar Chart |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| ![Choropleth Map](docs/images/choropleth_map.png) | ![Pie Chart](docs/images/pie_chart.png) | ![Bar Chart](docs/images/bar_chart.png) |
| *Average age by state* | *Gender distribution* | *Patient count by state* |

## Tech Stack

### Frontend
- **React 19** with TypeScript
- **Vite** for blazing-fast development
- **Plotly.js** for interactive visualizations (60+ chart types)
- **Tailwind CSS** for styling
- **Nginx** for production serving

### Backend
- **FastAPI** (Python) for REST API
- **SQLite** for data storage and chat history
- **Google Gemini AI** or **Ollama** (local) for natural language processing
- **Pandas** for data manipulation
- **Uvicorn** ASGI server

### Infrastructure
- **Docker & Docker Compose** for containerization
- **Ollama** for local LLM inference (Qwen2.5:3b)

---

## Docker Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# Copy environment file
cp .env.docker .env

# Start all services
docker-compose up -d

# Pull Ollama model
docker exec -it mediquery-ai-ollama ollama pull qwen2.5:3b

# Access the application
# Frontend: http://localhost:3000
# Backend:  http://localhost:8000
# API Docs: http://localhost:8000/docs
```

### Services

| Service | Port | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| **Frontend** | 3000 | React + Nginx |
| **Backend** | 8000 | FastAPI + Python |
| **Ollama** | 11434 | Local LLM (Qwen2.5:3b) |

**Full Docker guide:** [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

Edit `backend/.env` or `.env` (for Docker):

```bash
# Google Gemini API Key (optional if using local model)
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

# Anthropic API Key (optional if using local model)
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

# Chat History Configuration
CHAT_HISTORY_RETENTION_HOURS=24

# Local Model Configuration (Ollama)
USE_LOCAL_MODEL=true              # true = local, false = cloud
LOCAL_MODEL_NAME=qwen2.5:3b       # Ollama model
OLLAMA_HOST=http://localhost:11434
```

### Available Models

**Local (Ollama):**
- `qwen2.5-coder:7b` (Recommended - SOTA for SQL/Code)
- `sqlcoder:7b` (Specialized for SQL generation)
- `llama3.1` (General purpose reasoning)
- `qwen3:latest` (Balanced performance)


**Cloud Models (Recommended):**
- `gemma-3-27b-it` (High Quota / Default)
- `gemini-2.5-flash-lite` (Fast / Efficient)
- `claude-3-5-sonnet` (Anthropic - requires `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`)

---

## Usage

### Example Queries

**Basic Queries:**
- "Show patient count by state"
- "List all patients with diabetes"
- "Count visits by diagnosis"

**Visualization Queries:**
- "Distribution of patients by gender" → Pie Chart
- "Patient count by state on a map" → Choropleth Map
- "Show correlation between age and BMI" → Scatter Plot
- "Frequency distribution of patient ages" → Histogram
- "Show patients by insurance type and income bracket" → Sunburst/Treemap

**Advanced Queries:**
- "3D plot of age, BMI, and cholesterol" → 3D Scatter
- "Correlation matrix of patient health metrics" → Heatmap
- "Patient registrations over time" → Line Chart

### Interactive Features

- **Chart Type Switching**: Click any compatible visualization type above the chart
- **Zoom & Pan**: Use Plotly's built-in controls
- **Download**: Export charts as PNG images
- **Chat History**: Conversations persist across sessions (24-hour default)

---



## Local Model Setup (Ollama)

### Option 1: Docker (Included)

Ollama is automatically included in the Docker setup - no separate installation needed!

### Option 2: System Installation

**Windows:**
```powershell
winget install Ollama.Ollama
ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Ubuntu/Linux:**
```bash
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Configure:**
```bash
# In backend/.env
USE_LOCAL_MODEL=true
LOCAL_MODEL_NAME=qwen2.5:3b
```

**Full guide:** [backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md](backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md)

---

## Project Structure

```
medicareAI/
├── backend/
│   ├── data/                    # CSV datasets (enhanced)
│   ├── services/                # Application logic
│   ├── main.py                  # FastAPI application
│   └── Dockerfile               # Backend container
│
├── frontend/
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── components/
│   │   │   ├── ChatBox.tsx      # Main chat interface
│   │   │   └── PlotlyVisualizer.tsx  # 60+ chart types
│   │   └── App.tsx              # Root component
│   └── Dockerfile               # Frontend container
│
├── docker-compose.yml           # Container orchestration (use 'docker compose')
├── docker-start.ps1             # Windows quick start
├── docker-start.sh              # Linux/Mac quick start
├── DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md         # Deployment guide
└── README.md
```

---

## Supported Visualizations

The system intelligently selects from **60+ Plotly.js chart types**:

| Category | Chart Types |
|----------|-------------|
| **Basic** | Bar, Pie, Donut, Line, Scatter, Area |
| **Statistical** | Box, Violin, Histogram, Heatmap, Contour |
| **Financial** | Waterfall, Funnel, Candlestick, OHLC |
| **3D** | Scatter3D, Surface, Mesh3D |
| **Maps** | Choropleth, ScatterGeo, Mapbox |
| **Hierarchical** | Sunburst, Treemap, Icicle, Sankey |
| **Specialized** | Indicator, Gauge, Parcoords, SPLOM |

**Interactive chart switching** - Click any compatible type to switch views!

---

## Troubleshooting

### Docker Issues

**Ollama model not found:**
```bash
docker exec -it mediquery-ai-ollama ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Backend can't connect to Ollama:**
```bash
docker compose restart ollama
docker compose restart backend
```

**Port already in use:**
Edit `docker-compose.yml` and change ports (then run `docker compose up -d`):
```yaml
ports:
  - "3001:80"  # Frontend
  - "8001:8000"  # Backend
```

### Manual Installation Issues

**Vite Cache Issues:**
```bash
cd frontend
rm -rf node_modules/.vite
npm run dev
```

**API Key Not Working:**
1. Verify key at https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey
2. Ensure `.env` is in `backend/` directory
3. Restart backend server

**Chat History Not Persisting:**
Check that `chat_history.db` exists in `backend/` directory.

---

## Development

### Adding New Datasets

1. Add CSV file to `backend/data/`
2. Database service auto-loads all CSV files
3. Restart backend

### Customizing Visualizations

Edit `frontend/src/components/PlotlyVisualizer.tsx`:
- Add new chart types
- Modify color schemes
- Adjust layout configurations

### Hot Reload

- **Backend**: Auto-reloads on code changes (uvicorn --reload)
- **Frontend**: Auto-reloads on code changes (Vite HMR)
- **Docker**: Backend volume-mounted for hot reload

---

## 📈 Performance

| Metric | Target | Actual |
|--------|--------|--------|
| **Query Response Time** | < 3s | ✅ 1-3s |
| **Backend Health Check** | < 100ms | ✅ ~50ms |
| **Frontend Load Time** | < 2s | ✅ ~1s |
| **Chart Render Time** | < 500ms | ✅ ~300ms |
| **Concurrent Users** | 10+ | ✅ Tested |

---

## Security Notes

⚠️ **This is a POC/Demo Application**

For production use:
- Implement proper authentication
- Use environment-specific CORS settings
- Add rate limiting
- Sanitize all SQL inputs (currently using parameterized queries)
- Use a production database (PostgreSQL, MySQL)
- Implement HTTPS
- Secure Ollama endpoint
- Use Docker secrets for sensitive data
- **JWT_SECRET_KEY**: Ensure this is set to a strong random string in production (used for signing tokens)

---

## License

MIT License - See LICENSE file for details

---

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## Acknowledgments

- **Google Gemini AI** for natural language processing
- **Ollama** for local LLM inference
- **Plotly.js** for interactive visualizations
- **FastAPI** for the excellent Python web framework
- **React** and **Vite** for the frontend stack

---

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md) for Docker help
- Check [LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md](backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md) for Ollama help

---

**Built with ❤️ using AI-assisted development**

Commit message:

docs: update READMEs to include Explainable AI and thinking process features

README.md, after:

# AI Healthcare Data Agent

An intelligent healthcare data analysis system that combines natural language processing with interactive data visualizations. Ask questions in plain English and get instant insights with beautiful Plotly.js charts.

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9+-blue.svg)
![Node](https://img.shields.io/badge/node-23+-green.svg)
![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ready-blue.svg)

## 🚀 Quick Start (Docker - Recommended)

**The fastest way to get started:**

```powershell
# Windows
.\docker-start.ps1

# Linux/Mac
chmod +x docker-start.sh
./docker-start.sh
```

This will:
- ✅ Start Ollama (local LLM - qwen3:latest)
- ✅ Start FastAPI backend
- ✅ Start React frontend with Nginx
- ✅ Pull the AI model (~2GB)
- ✅ Open at http://localhost:3000

**Requirements:** Docker Desktop ([Download](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop))

**See full Docker guide:** [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Visual Insights](#-visual-insights)
- [Tech Stack](#tech-stack)
- [Quick Start (Docker)](#-quick-start-docker---recommended)
- [Manual Installation](#manual-installation)
  - [Ubuntu/Linux](#ubuntulinux)
  - [Windows](#windows)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Docker Deployment](#docker-deployment)
- [Local Model Setup](#local-model-setup-ollama)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Supported Visualizations](#supported-visualizations)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Development](#development)
- [Security](#security)

---

## Features

- 🤖 **Natural Language Queries**: Ask questions in plain English about healthcare data
- 📊 **60+ Interactive Visualizations**: Powered by Plotly.js with real-time chart type switching
- 🧠 **Explainable AI**: View the agent's step-by-step thinking process and SQL generation logic
- 🔐 **Authentication & Security**: Sci-Fi themed Login/Register, JWT protection, and GitHub Secrets integration
- 💬 **Persistent Chat History**: Context-aware conversations suitable for follow-up questions
- 🎨 **Futuristic HUD Interface**: Cyberpunk-inspired dark theme with glassmorphism effects
- 🔄 **Smart Visualization Selection**: AI-powered chart type recommendation based on data structure
- 🎯 **Hybrid LLM Support**: Local models (Ollama) or Cloud (Google Gemini)
- 🐳 **Docker Ready**: One-command deployment with Docker Compose

## ✨ Visual Insights

| Choropleth Map | Pie Chart | Bar Chart |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| ![Choropleth Map](docs/images/choropleth_map.png) | ![Pie Chart](docs/images/pie_chart.png) | ![Bar Chart](docs/images/bar_chart.png) |
| *Average age by state* | *Gender distribution* | *Patient count by state* |

## Tech Stack

### Frontend
- **React 19** with TypeScript
- **Vite** for blazing-fast development
- **Plotly.js** for interactive visualizations (60+ chart types)
- **Tailwind CSS** for styling
- **Nginx** for production serving

### Backend
- **FastAPI** (Python) for REST API
- **SQLite** for data storage and chat history
- **Google Gemini AI** or **Ollama** (local) for natural language processing
- **Pandas** for data manipulation
- **Uvicorn** ASGI server

### Infrastructure
- **Docker & Docker Compose** for containerization
- **Ollama** for local LLM inference (Qwen2.5:3b)

---

## Docker Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# Copy environment file
cp .env.docker .env

# Start all services
docker-compose up -d

# Pull Ollama model
docker exec -it mediquery-ai-ollama ollama pull qwen2.5:3b

# Access the application
# Frontend: http://localhost:3000
# Backend:  http://localhost:8000
# API Docs: http://localhost:8000/docs
```

### Services

| Service | Port | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| **Frontend** | 3000 | React + Nginx |
| **Backend** | 8000 | FastAPI + Python |
| **Ollama** | 11434 | Local LLM (Qwen2.5:3b) |

**Full Docker guide:** [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md)

---

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

Edit `backend/.env` or `.env` (for Docker):

```bash
# Google Gemini API Key (optional if using local model)
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

# Anthropic API Key (optional if using local model)
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

# Chat History Configuration
CHAT_HISTORY_RETENTION_HOURS=24

# Local Model Configuration (Ollama)
USE_LOCAL_MODEL=true              # true = local, false = cloud
LOCAL_MODEL_NAME=qwen2.5:3b       # Ollama model
OLLAMA_HOST=http://localhost:11434
```

### Available Models

**Local (Ollama):**
- `qwen2.5-coder:7b` (Recommended - SOTA for SQL/Code)
- `sqlcoder:7b` (Specialized for SQL generation)
- `llama3.1` (General purpose reasoning)
- `qwen3:latest` (Balanced performance)


**Cloud Models (Recommended):**
- `gemma-3-27b-it` (High Quota / Default)
- `gemini-2.5-flash-lite` (Fast / Efficient)
- `claude-3-5-sonnet` (Anthropic - requires `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`)

---

## Usage

### Example Queries

**Basic Queries:**
- "Show patient count by state"
- "List all patients with diabetes"
- "Count visits by diagnosis"

**Visualization Queries:**
- "Distribution of patients by gender" → Pie Chart
- "Patient count by state on a map" → Choropleth Map
- "Show correlation between age and BMI" → Scatter Plot
- "Frequency distribution of patient ages" → Histogram
- "Show patients by insurance type and income bracket" → Sunburst/Treemap

**Advanced Queries:**
- "3D plot of age, BMI, and cholesterol" → 3D Scatter
- "Correlation matrix of patient health metrics" → Heatmap
- "Patient registrations over time" → Line Chart

### Interactive Features

- **Chart Type Switching**: Click any compatible visualization type above the chart
- **Zoom & Pan**: Use Plotly's built-in controls
- **Download**: Export charts as PNG images
- **Chat History**: Conversations persist across sessions (24-hour default)

---



## Local Model Setup (Ollama)

### Option 1: Docker (Included)

Ollama is automatically included in the Docker setup - no separate installation needed!

### Option 2: System Installation

**Windows:**
```powershell
winget install Ollama.Ollama
ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Ubuntu/Linux:**
```bash
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Configure:**
```bash
# In backend/.env
USE_LOCAL_MODEL=true
LOCAL_MODEL_NAME=qwen2.5:3b
```

**Full guide:** [backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md](backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md)

---

## Project Structure

```
medicareAI/
├── backend/
│   ├── data/                    # CSV datasets (enhanced)
│   ├── services/                # Application logic
│   ├── main.py                  # FastAPI application
│   └── Dockerfile               # Backend container
│
├── frontend/
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── components/
│   │   │   ├── ChatBox.tsx      # Main chat interface
│   │   │   └── PlotlyVisualizer.tsx  # 60+ chart types
│   │   └── App.tsx              # Root component
│   └── Dockerfile               # Frontend container
│
├── docker-compose.yml           # Container orchestration (use 'docker compose')
├── docker-start.ps1             # Windows quick start
├── docker-start.sh              # Linux/Mac quick start
├── DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md         # Deployment guide
└── README.md
```

---

## Supported Visualizations

The system intelligently selects from **60+ Plotly.js chart types**:

| Category | Chart Types |
|----------|-------------|
| **Basic** | Bar, Pie, Donut, Line, Scatter, Area |
| **Statistical** | Box, Violin, Histogram, Heatmap, Contour |
| **Financial** | Waterfall, Funnel, Candlestick, OHLC |
| **3D** | Scatter3D, Surface, Mesh3D |
| **Maps** | Choropleth, ScatterGeo, Mapbox |
| **Hierarchical** | Sunburst, Treemap, Icicle, Sankey |
| **Specialized** | Indicator, Gauge, Parcoords, SPLOM |

**Interactive chart switching** - Click any compatible type to switch views!

---

## Troubleshooting

### Docker Issues

**Ollama model not found:**
```bash
docker exec -it mediquery-ai-ollama ollama pull qwen2.5:3b
```

**Backend can't connect to Ollama:**
```bash
docker compose restart ollama
docker compose restart backend
```

**Port already in use:**
Edit `docker-compose.yml` and change ports (then run `docker compose up -d`):
```yaml
ports:
  - "3001:80"  # Frontend
  - "8001:8000"  # Backend
```

### Manual Installation Issues

**Vite Cache Issues:**
```bash
cd frontend
rm -rf node_modules/.vite
npm run dev
```

**API Key Not Working:**
1. Verify key at https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey
2. Ensure `.env` is in `backend/` directory
3. Restart backend server

**Chat History Not Persisting:**
Check that `chat_history.db` exists in `backend/` directory.

---

## Development

### Adding New Datasets

1. Add CSV file to `backend/data/`
2. Database service auto-loads all CSV files
3. Restart backend

### Customizing Visualizations

Edit `frontend/src/components/PlotlyVisualizer.tsx`:
- Add new chart types
- Modify color schemes
- Adjust layout configurations

### Hot Reload

- **Backend**: Auto-reloads on code changes (uvicorn --reload)
- **Frontend**: Auto-reloads on code changes (Vite HMR)
- **Docker**: Backend volume-mounted for hot reload

---

## 📈 Performance

| Metric | Target | Actual |
|--------|--------|--------|
| **Query Response Time** | < 3s | ✅ 1-3s |
| **Backend Health Check** | < 100ms | ✅ ~50ms |
| **Frontend Load Time** | < 2s | ✅ ~1s |
| **Chart Render Time** | < 500ms | ✅ ~300ms |
| **Concurrent Users** | 10+ | ✅ Tested |

---

## Security Notes

⚠️ **This is a POC/Demo Application**

For production use:
- Implement proper authentication
- Use environment-specific CORS settings
- Add rate limiting
- Sanitize all SQL inputs (currently using parameterized queries)
- Use a production database (PostgreSQL, MySQL)
- Implement HTTPS
- Secure Ollama endpoint
- Use Docker secrets for sensitive data
- **JWT_SECRET_KEY**: Ensure this is set to a strong random string in production (used for signing tokens)

---

## License

MIT License - See LICENSE file for details

---

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## Acknowledgments

- **Google Gemini AI** for natural language processing
- **Ollama** for local LLM inference
- **Plotly.js** for interactive visualizations
- **FastAPI** for the excellent Python web framework
- **React** and **Vite** for the frontend stack

---

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check [DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md](DOCKER_DEPLOYMENT.md) for Docker help
- Check [LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md](backend/docs/LOCAL_MODEL_SETUP.md) for Ollama help

---

**Built with ❤️ using AI-assisted development**
